# Gentrification and the Detrimental Impacts of Airbnb in London: a Policy Briefing

## Intro 

In recent decades, the term ‘gentrification’ has circulated in the mainstream. The term encompasses a variety of phenomena from shifting neighbourhood aesthetics, to the rhetoric surrounding ‘revitalisation’ of dilapidated city-spaces and displacement of marginalised communities (Pell, 2014). One of the catalysts for these phenomena is short-term rental platforms. Airbnb in particular has significantly reshaped housing that its impact has colloquially been termed the ‘Airbnb effect’ in economics. In short, the term describes Airbnb’s impact on cities around the world: reduced housing supply and higher rent prices (Chaudhary, 2021). So, despite Airbnb’s lucrativeness , its systematic widening of rent gaps accelerates gentrification – or ‘Airbnbification’ – by pricing out long-time residents and small businesses (Wachsmuth and Weisler, 2018; Peters, 2016; Rozena and Lees, 2021). 

Airbnb's lack of accountability has pervaded the London housing market since its arrival in the city in 2009. Whether through displacing minorities or accelerating rent spikes, the platform has destabilised housing in much of London. Moreover, Airbnb has contributed to rapid gentrification. Airbnb’s reputed ‘affordable’ short-term stays effectively displace long-term residents and businesses (Chen, 2021). 

Deprivation data at the LSOA level, and 2019 and 2022 data from InsideAirbnb, a non-profit organisation that provides real-time data of Airbnbs in cities across the globe, served as the basis for this analysis. And, in light of Airbnb’s wide scale impact on London, this report turns to specific boroughs to extrapolate from the nuance of the platform’s presence in the city. Those boroughs are: Camden, Hackney, and Kensington and Chelsea. These boroughs were selected due to their differences in geographic location, population, and having a similar number of Airbnbs. Further below are their profiles which provide context of their current states. 

Evidence to support this in-depth analysis is that Camden Council data from 2019 reveals that 48% of the 7,100 whole properties listed on platforms like Airbnb exceeded the 90-day legal limit. Additionally, Camden Council currently has 6,000 families experiencing insecure living conditions on its housing waiting list (Temperton 2020). This issue varies by degree in all boroughs. For effective policy change to take place, it is important to properly characterise Airbnb’s impact on housing in each borough.

## Airbnb & Gentrification in Greater London

How has Airbnb proved to be a negative venture for London? Airbnb guests often contribute to antisocial behaviour, fragment communities through their transient nature, and on average it has been reported that a 1% increase in listings leads to a 0.018% increase in rents (Barker 2020). Of listings active in 2020, 23% supposedly breached the legal 90-day limit in London  (Temperton, 2020). This, paired with the GLA 2020 report which found that between 2015 and 2019 there has been a fourfold increase in Airbnb listings in London alone, further exemplifies the harmful swell of Airbnb (GLA Housing and Land, 2020). The continued deregulation of Airbnb is a disservice to Londoners of all socioeconomic and ethnic backgrounds, as everyone deserves equitable access to housing (see Ferreri and Sanyal, 2018 on deregulation).

Previous quantitative research on Airbnb has neglected how rhetoric, as a reflection of social attitudes, might correlate to more tangible impacts of Airbnb and its cultural damage. Accordingly, this report looks at the language in Airbnb listing descriptions and bridges the gap between the qualitative and quantitative. The research for this report found that listings using words like trendy, revitalise, popular, edgy, vibrant, and authentic followed distinct spatial patterns. In 2019, these listings were generally confined to Zone Three. ‘Hotspots’ of these listings were dispersed across the city. The opposite was true in 2022. In fact, Hackney, Islington and Tower Hamlets were the top 3 boroughs with listings using the language of gentrification. Hackney and Tower Hamlets are also two of London’s more deprived boroughs. **Crucially, these spatial patterns revealed that 2022 listings using words tied with gentrification are statistically more likely to be associated with areas that have high deprivation in terms of access to housing.
